The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy,
presented by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The following show will be an interview with Frederick Pohl. Pohl knows science
fiction as few other people do. He's been an editor of science fiction books and
magazines, an agent who's handled some of the biggest names in the field, and an
author who's won numerous Hugo and Nebula awards. In fact, he's the only
individual to be awarded a Hugo as an author and as an editor. He began
publishing science fiction in the late 1930s. Perhaps his best-known work is The
Space Merchants, written in collaboration with Cyril Kornbluth. The novel
illustrates one of Pohl's trademarks, satire and social criticism. One of his
more recent novels, Gateway, won both Hugo and Nebula awards. In 1978, Pohl
published his memoirs, The Way the Future Was, a fascinating description of his
interface with science fiction through a long and uniquely vital career. We can
be grateful that his career is still alive and progressing.
Mr. Pohl, you've written of how you grew up with science fiction, reading the
Pulps, organizing clubs, editing fanzines, and so forth. Could you recall what
it was that attracted you to science fiction so completely at such an early age?
Well, I think it was basically the adventure, the kind of science fiction that
was being published around 1930 when I first got in touch with it. When I first
discovered that it existed, it was mostly space opera and gimmick stories and
stories about exciting, adventurous exploits all over the galaxy. And that was
in the middle of the Great Depression, and science fiction looked an awful lot
better to me than the real world that I could see. Okay, I believe your first
story was published around 1937. Is that correct, around that time? The first
thing I had published was a poem. It was an amazing story. I wrote it in 1935,
and it was accepted in 1936, and published in 1937, and paid for in 1938. So
somewhere in there I became a professional writer. The first story, I think, was
probably in 1938. It was a collaboration with another writer, and it appeared in
an astounding magazine that's now called Analogues. Could you explain just a
little bit about what the Futurians were, and your part in the organization?
Well, science fiction has some special traits, and one of them is that its
readers herd together as much as they can. They form fan clubs and associations
and correspondence groups and so on. And in New York City, there were quite a
few science fiction fans. And about 25 or 30, most of whom wanted to be writers,
formed a club called the Futurians. There were people like Cyril Kornbluth and
Isaac Asimov and Damon Knight and myself, quite a few others. Don Walheim, who's
now the head of Dahl Books as an editor, and no batches of others who really
desperately wanted to write science fiction or edit science fiction or something
like that. Quite a few of them acted out their childhood fantasies and did it.
And I'm not quite sure why the Futurians produced more science fiction writers
than most of the other clubs. It probably has something to do with size. New
York had a bigger pool of talent to draw from. The Los Angeles group also
produced quite a few, including Ray Bradbury and Larry Niven and several others.
Did you help each other in your writing? Was it sort of a brotherhood kind of
thing where you aided each other? It was partly help and partly one-upmanship,
putting each other down. We did discuss each other's work a lot. And I guess in
the process of criticizing it, there was a lot of help given. I think the
biggest factor that made it easier for a lot of us to go on with writing was
just the knowledge that other people were doing it. And also the fact that we
collaborated a lot. We remedied each other's deficiencies by writing, I mean, by
collaborating on single stories. And although most of the stories were not very
good, we did learn something by seeing how other people would tackle the same
subjects we were writing about.
You're uniquely qualified, I think, to comment on science fiction since you've
seen it from so many perspectives as a fan, an author, an agent, an editor, and
so forth. You started the editing part of it when you were 19 years old, I
think. Is that right? I was lucky enough to fall into a job as a professional
magazine editor. When I was 19, I had asked an editor I knew, because I'd been
trying to sell him stories without success, if he needed an assistant. And he
was kind enough not to laugh out loud. I didn't know at the time that not very
many science fiction magazine editors could afford assistance. But he mentioned
to me another publishing company that was expanding and suggested I get in touch
with them. So I did. It was popular publications, one of the biggest pulp houses
of the time. And they were expanding, and they gave me a job at $10 a week to
edit two professional science fiction magazines. $10 wasn't so bad. They hired
other editors for nothing at the same time. And most of the material you got
then was the pulp kind of stuff? It was mostly pulp, but it included a lot of
the writers who are the mainstays of the field now. I published a lot of Isaac
Asimov stuff because we were close friends. A few of Robert A. Heinlein's
stories that his primary market, John Campbell, for one reason or other, didn't
want to print. And Henry Kuttner and A.C. Van Lode and Cleve Cartmill and El
Sprig de Camp. And most of the people who were writing at that time wound up in
my magazine. Not always with their best stories. In fact, very often with their
worst stories, because I wasn't paying very much. I had a budget of about half a
cent a word. Yeah, and one of the other lines of work that you got into, I
remember, was as an advertising copywriter, which brings up to my mind the novel
The Space Merchants. Well, actually, The Space Merchants was sort of responsible
for it. When I was in the Army, in the Air Force in World War II, I had some
spare time on my hands in Italy. And I decided to write a novel. And the most
interesting subject I could think of was the advertising industry. So I wrote a
whole novel about advertising. Very bad novel. After the war was over, I took it
out and looked at it and realized that it was pretty bad. And one of its great
defects was that I didn't know anything about advertising. So I went to the New
York Sunday Times and looked in the classified section and found a couple of
people advertising jobs in advertising and applied and got one of them and spent
about three years as an advertising copywriter. During that time, I looked over
this old novel again and realized that it had many more faults and ignorance.
And I burned it. And I had all the basic information about advertising and no
novel to put it in. So I thought of writing a science fiction novel. And it
turned out to be The Space Merchant. Cyril Kornblith was a close friend of mine.
We'd collaborated before the war, before we both went into service. And after I
had written about a third of it, because a magazine editor wanted it in a hurry,
I asked Cyril if he wanted to help me with it. And he and I collaborated on it
from that on. What was your normal method of collaboration? How did you work out
your scenario for the future? We didn't work them out in very great detail ahead
of time. And mostly what Cyril and I did was to, let's see, we wrote seven
novels and a number of short stories together. Generally speaking, what we did
after the war, after The Space Merchant, then we began writing novels more often
than short stories. Cyril would come out to my house in Red Bank, New Jersey,
where we kept the room for him with his own typewriter. And we'd sit around and
talk for a while and discuss general areas we were interested in writing about,
maybe some characters. And then we'd flip a coin, and the loser would go up to
the third floor and write the first four pages. And he'd come down and say,
you're on, and the other person would go up and write the next four pages. And
if you do that about 25 or 30 times, you have the rough draft of a complete
novel. So everything got radically rewritten after that, because the rough draft
was pretty rough. But structurally, it was all there. Going back to The Space
Merchants, there's one question I can never avoid asking an author. I'm sure you
get these all the time, and I'm not sure how you respond to them. But regarding
the ending of the novel, did you intend for that to be optimistic that we're
going to get a new start on Venus, maybe perhaps construct a better society? Was
that the intention there, or did you leave it ambiguous? I left it ambiguous
partly because I wasn't feeling very positive at the time. The novel was written
in 1952 and thereabouts, which was a pretty grimy period in the history of this
country. It was the McCarthy years and the Cold War years, and things did not
look too, they didn't look even as good as they do now, as a matter of fact. So
I wasn't feeling optimistic. I didn't mean to foreclose the possibility of a
happy ending. Actually, the novel had two endings. There was a different ending
in the magazine version. More upbeat, but less organically related to the rest
of the novel. It was put in at the insistence of the magazine editor. Many
readers, of course, have noticed a very strong social element in your work. You
have much to say about United States society and culture and so forth, and I
believe you've even been involved in politics. Have you seen yourself in the
role of a preacher or moralist with warnings and science fiction as sort of a
pulpit maybe or a soapbox sort of a thing to satirize with? Oh, sure. I think
that every writer who really has any interest in what he's doing feels that he
has something to say. There's a remark, I don't remember the source of it, that
the proper title of every book is really how to be more like me. And I think
that's something. I think that writers are preachers and educators and
polemicists and propagandists. It isn't always political and it isn't always
overt, but if it isn't there, the novel doesn't say anything. My own interests
have been fairly heavily social and political most of my life. I was active, as
you mentioned, in a lot of political things at one time or another. I even wrote
a book called Practical Politics, which is sort of a how-to-do-it manual of how
to make the political apparatus work for whatever cause is interesting. But I do
not go out of my way to preach. It just, I guess, colors everything I say
because a lot of myself, and as of every other writer I know, goes into what I'm
writing. Do you think that science fiction has peculiar qualifications to act as
a vehicle for social comment? I think science fiction has special qualifications
to act as a vehicle for discussing anything that affects the human being. It's a
way of looking at the human race from outside objectively. It's a way of, it's a
sort of game-playing mechanism for seeing what would happen to human beings
under conditions that haven't occurred yet but are very possible. And I think
that that's probably one of the strongest factors accounting for the continual
growth and interest in science fiction that seems to have been going on as long
as I've been alive. Okay. In some of your recent works, say, Jim and Man Plus,
you describe some bad political systems, I think, where there's a lot of
deception, selfish motives, war. I think even in Jim, it was annihilation of the
earth. Does that concentration on the bad aspects of society come from your view
of the world? No, I'm really Pollyanna. I'm a great optimist about the world. I
think that we're in for some terrible times, and I don't think that most of us
will enjoy much of what happens in the next few years. But I think in the long
run, the human race will straighten itself out and learn to be able to live
better with each other. But as far as writing a novel is concerned, it's not too
interesting to write about a utopia. I mean, what are you going to say about a
bunch of people who walk around in togas and eat whole wheat bread and never
have any bad thoughts? It's much more interesting to paint the disasters that
may occur as a sort of, well, I think it's Kingsley Amos who calls that kind of
science fiction cautionary literature. It's not saying what will happen. It's
just warning what might happen if we don't watch out. Okay. I'd like to ask the
same question about Jim that I did about space merchants. The ending of it. I
took it as hopeful, the part human, part alien society, which you envision at
the end of the book. I took that as hopeful. Would I be misreading it? No, I
think that it's hopeful. I think that what I was trying to say in Jim was
perhaps a little more overt preaching than I usually intend. And I'm not sure
that it came across the way I intended it to. But the subtitle of Jim is The
Making of a Utopia. And what I was trying to say in the novel is that you can't
really plan a utopia. You cannot construct a society that will make everybody
happy and productive and glad to be alive. Because the happiness, satisfaction,
productivity are not a state. They're a process. And no rigid system can survive
giving people maximum opportunities to realize their potential without being
flexible and changeable. Okay. And then in Man Plus, what fascinated me about
that book was your examination, the way you did it. You examined machine
intelligence. Do you think that's going to be possible? The computers that you
envision there are linking up and working to survive and sort of taking off? I
think it's an undecided question. I'm not sure which, it's 50-50 chance in my
opinion, whether machine intelligence can ever develop these sort of
independent, self-defining goals that human beings can. But I don't think it's
impossible. It's just that machines have not yet got that smart. What I'm pretty
sure of is that machines right now are doing things that 50 years ago one would
have described as showing human intelligence. They solve problems very well.
They even do creative things like composing music in any style you like or
writing poetry. It's true that the music and the poetry aren't very good, but
most human-generated music and poetry is not very good either. And I think that
maybe better programs can be written for machines and they can be more creative.
But I think when that happens, people will simply redefine that activity as no
longer a symptom of intelligence. Okay, the cyborg that you mention in that
book, too. Do you think man will be partners with machine in that sort of way,
too? It's possible. I didn't make up the cyborg. The term and the concept was
invented by two Air Force or NASA. I've forgotten which researchers in 1958 or
thereabouts. And it's been used widely in a lot of places, but I didn't make it
up. I think that we already see cyborgs in the sense that a lot of people have
mechanical parts keeping them alive, pacemakers and artificial plastic veins and
arteries and so on, not to mention things like glass eyes and prosthetic limbs
and false teeth and so on. And I think we also see a sort of intellectual
symbiosis like the cyborg in the link-up between human beings and computers.
Computers do not solve problems, do not make up problems and solve them, but
they make it possible for human beings to do that sort of thing in a fraction of
the time it used to take them. Therefore, they make the human beings effectively
more intelligent than they were. Okay, that leads me up to Gateway, which is one
of my favorite books. I think you've also written or said that it's one of your
favorite novels. Yeah, it's a novel that I cared most about. I'm not entirely
pleased with anything I've written, and I'm very displeased with a lot of what
I've written. But Gateway comes as close to being the way I would like it to be
as any novel I've ever written. Now, I think I noticed this. I'm sure many
readers did, too. In fact, you've commented on it. There's a departure in style,
I think, from your other work. What were the influences that both caused the
idea of the book, perhaps, and also the different kind of style you used in it?
Well, one of the big things in Gateway was that I was under no pressure from
anyone but myself to do it the way I thought it should be done. I had my
publisher at that time, my principal publisher was a man named Ian Valentine,
who offered me a contract with a substantial advance to write a novel without
saying what the novel was going to be and without imposing any deadline on when
I had to deliver it. So I didn't have to discuss it with an editor ahead of time
or write an outline and limit myself in the opportunities I could take. And I
didn't have the pressure of getting it delivered at a specific date to make me
rush it through. And actually, it took me, I think, six years from the time I
signed the contract until I delivered it, and I had been mulling it over for
several years before that. All in all, I think the book was something like ten
years in the gestation. And also, it's not possible for a writer to produce at
the same level all the time. I don't know why. There are times when I write
better than others. I can't relate them to any outside influence or to my
resolution to do well or anything like that. I just know that sometimes it comes
out better than other times, and Gateway, I think, is one of the times when it
came out very well. I wish I could say the same of all of my books. Did you say
the New Wave was an influence on the way you wrote that book, the so-called New
Wave in science fiction? The New Wave was an attempt, I guess, 15 years ago or
more, of a number of writers to break away from the traditional kinds of science
fiction. In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction anymore.
They wanted to call it speculative fiction or call it nothing at all. And they
were interested primarily in writing about inner space rather than outer space,
and secondarily a lot of them in things like the drug culture and rock music and
so on. But in the rather bitter internal struggle that went on in science
fiction, a lot of people taking sides one way or the other. I think everyone was
deeply affected. And the New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old
dinosaurs like Asimov and Heinlein and me that there were non-traditional ways
of constructing a novel. You see, most of us had grown up when science fiction
was in the pulp magazines, and most of it was written according to some variant
of a pulp formula. Well, it turned out that wasn't necessary. And I think the
New Wave is responsible for teaching us that. When you were writing Gateway,
when you conceived of the idea during that gestation period, did you intend for
there to be a sequel to it at that time? No, I did not intend for there to be a
sequel to it until it was published and people began telling me I ought to write
a sequel. Ah, that's what I was interested in. In other words, were these fans?
You responded to fan desires in that respect? Largely to fan desires and also to
my publisher who sat on me and insisted. I wasn't too hard to convince, but I
did not have any such plan. I know that Gateway leaves a lot of questions
unanswered and suggests a lot of things that are not made explicit in the novel.
And I did all that on purpose, but not for the sake of preparing the way for a
sequel, but just because I think that's a characteristic of a lot of good
science fiction. When you finish the story, you think of things that let you
write your own stories after it. I mean, that's the sort of thing that Arthur
Clarke does very well. And I try to do it whenever I can. And it just turned out
that there was a lot of public pressure to write a sequel. There's also been
public pressure to write another sequel, and I'm just about to sign a contract
to do that, but I swear I had no such intention when I finished Beyond the Blue
Event Horizon. That's what I was going to ask you. There were still some
questions about the Heechi that were open for exploration, and I wondered if
you'd considered another novel about them. I considered it, and just a few weeks
ago, I yielded to pressure from my publisher and said I would sign a contract
for another book. I don't plan to go on beyond that. I don't want to do Habit
-Costello meet the Heechi, or Habit-Heechi go to Hawaii or whatever. That's
going to be the end of it as far as I'm concerned, but I will write one more. So
many authors are doing trilogies these days. I thought that maybe you'd started
out with that idea way back. No, not me. A lot of them do, and I kind of resent
it, because I think mostly it's unfair to the reader to give them part of a
story. I don't think that's true of either Gateway or Beyond the Blue. I think
they stand up by themselves. Okay, I'd like to switch for just a few minutes to
some questions about your time as an editor. I think it was during the 60s you
served as the editor of Galaxy in some of its satellite publications. And
probably the best science fiction of the decade went through you in that
magazine, the best magazine science fiction. I was interested in how much
influence you had on the authors, your method of encouraging, coaxing, how you
worked with them to get the material you did. What's different with different
authors, the thing that I know best about how to be an editor is that you cannot
have a general policy and apply it to everybody and hope it will work in every
case, because writers are very diverse human beings. Some of them respond to
long letters of criticism and suggestions and patting on the back or beating
over the head. And some of them do not want any outside influence at all. One of
my favorite writers told me early in our relationship that he was willing to
have me buy some stories and reject others, but he didn't want to hear why. If I
sent it back, just send it back and say no, and not tell them what I didn't like
about it, because that upset them. Other writers wanted to know in great detail
not only what I didn't like, but what I did like. And also there are some
writers who are very responsive to money, and some to whom money means nothing
at all. Not that they are immune to it, but they don't want to think in those
terms. And there are some writers who respond to a lot of personal attention and
some who really want to be left alone. And I had to find out something about
each writer to find out the best way to deal with them. I can't say I was always
successful either. There are a number of writers that I think I should have been
able to get more good material from and didn't. And I just missed the
combination in those cases. An editor in that position, the kind of position you
had, I would assume that a lot of stories get published because of the editor's
help and whatever kinds of encouragement he gives that would not have been
published otherwise. Quite a few. Yeah, especially quite a few stories come to
be written because an editor says, Listen, you've got a notion here that you are
throwing away and you really should expand it. John Campbell was superb at that
sort of thing. Some of the best stories he published were the result of his
telling a writer that he had an idea they didn't realize he had, and then
getting the writer to write it. And I tried to do that as much as I could, too.
But writers do not always know where their ideas come from and do not always
know how to deal with outside suggestions. There's one very good writer who
always wanted comments and suggestions who I finally decided I shouldn't ever
give any to because the only thing he ever did was not to rewrite a story the
way I suggested it, but to throw it away and write a whole new one. I was never
able to get him to rewrite a line. And as a result, there are probably 10 or 15
stories of his that will never be published because he just threw them away.
Hmm. When you, I think IF was one of the magazines you worked with when you were
with Galaxy. Galaxy and IF and a couple of others. Did you get Larry Niven's
first story in that IF magazine? I published his first story, which is a very
short one, and for which he got a very short paycheck, and his next one was a
little longer, and he got a little more, and the next one was quite a lot
longer, and he got quite a lot more. And Larry said that if it hadn't been for
those three events in that order, he could not have gone on being a writer. So I
take some pride in the fact that I was instrumental in making it possible for
him to devote his time to writing.
Frederick Pohl has every reason to be proud. He has either produced or helped
produce some of the masterworks of science fiction. Through being an editor, he
has helped discover and develop some of today's best writers. Suggested works
are
This has been the
Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCB-FM at Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.inander